# Getting started with Logos

## What is Logos?

... What is this thing? Why is this thing? ... WIP ...

Key motivations:

* Attempt to create a more accessible miniKanren implementation, while preserving the core approaches in micro/miniKanren.
  * More approachable to someone who has never been exposed to miniKanren or Prolog, but is familiar with Elixir pattern matching.
  * Names that are more self-describing, more grammatically consistent, and hopefully more memorable.
  * Explicit and consistent syntactic conventions.
* A hosted, idiomatic Elixir implementation.
  * Elixir's use of module namespaces means that naming conflicts can often be avoided, allowing for better function names.
  * When parallelization is an option, Elixir makes this straightforward.
* Expose and explain Elixir's logical roots.
* Focus on a well-designed, minimal base implementation that can be used immediate to support several meaningful use cases.
  * Only list data structure (no maps or tuples).
  * Only `choice` as non-relational rule.
* A well-organized code base that facilitates exploration, extension, and custom usage patterns.
* The paradigm of relational programming is generally interesting and still relevant.

### A sample of references that influenced this work

[The Reasoned Schemer](https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/reasoned-schemer)

[µKanren: A Minimal Functional Core for Relational Programming](http://webyrd.net/scheme-2013/papers/HemannMuKanren2013.pdf)

[The Art of Prolog](https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/art-prolog-second-edition)

[Relational Programming in miniKanren: Techniques, Applications, and Implementations](https://scholarworks.iu.edu/dspace/bitstream/handle/2022/8777/Byrd_indiana_0093A_10344.pdf)

[Clojure's core.logic](https://github.com/clojure/core.logic)

[Build your own Logic Engine](https://youtu.be/y1bVJOAfhKY)

[ExKanren](https://github.com/lyons/ExKanren)

[Hello, declarative world](https://tomstu.art/hello-declarative-world)

## Quick start

To get started with Logos right away, type `use Logos` at the head of a module or in a Livebook session.

```elixir
use Logos
```

In the calling module, this expands to

<!-- livebook:{"force_markdown":true} -->

```elixir
import Logos.Core, only: [all: 1, any: 1, equal: 2, failure: 0, success: 0]
import Logos.Interface, only: [ask: 2, fork: 1, with_vars: 2]
import Logos.Rule
```

and brings in a set of common logical rules as well as the macros `ask`, `with_vars`, and `fork`. Now that the basic functionality is accessible, let's see `Logos` in action with several small examples.

## Ask a question

To get acclimated to the usage of `Logos`, start with a simple algebra question: _What is the value of the variable `x` when `x` is equal to 1?_ This isn't a trick; the answer, `x = 1`, is in the phrasing of the question. But this trifling example will help exhibit the usage of `Logos`. In `Logos`, this question is expressed as

```elixir
ask [x] do
  equal(x, 1)
end
```

The macro `ask` takes a list of variables as its argument, a logical _goal_ as a body, and returns an Elixir `Stream`. Each item in the stream is a list of values of the variables passed to `ask` (`x` in the above example). To get a list of results, pipe the stream into `Enum.to_list`:

```elixir
ask [x] do
  equal(x, 1)
end
|> Enum.to_list()
```

When `Logos` evaluates a query, an attempt is made to satisfy the goal. However, it may be that the goal expresses a false relationship, as shown here:

```elixir
ask [x] do
  equal(1, 2)
end
|> Enum.to_list()
```

The result is an empty stream, meaning that there is no state for which the goal is true.

<!-- livebook:{"break_markdown":true} -->

Several specialized words are used above and in what follows, and it's important to have some early appreciation of their meanings. In `Logos`, the equivalence _rule_ is expressed as `equal(x, y)`, where `x`and `y` are any two _terms_. A _term_ can be a variable or a constant (number, string, or atom), or a list of variables and constants. A _rule_ expresses a logical relationship among terms. When `x` is a variable and `y` is set to the constant 1, `equal(x, 1)` is a logical _goal_ asserting that the variable `x` is equal to 1. When a goal is wrapped with `ask`, that goal is posed as a _query_ against any data already captured in the running program. The definitions of _rule_, _goal_, and _query_ will be further explored when we discuss the implementation of `Logos`.

<!-- livebook:{"break_markdown":true} -->

To show that `equal` works for list terms, find `x` and `y` in the following query:

```elixir
ask [x, y] do
  equal([x, 2, 3], [1, 2, y])
end
|> Enum.to_list()
```

Because the algorithm that performs this matching is recursive, list terms with any depth can be used:

```elixir
ask [x, y] do
  equal(
    [1, [2, [x, y]]],
    [1, [2, [3, [4, 5]]]]
  )
end
|> Enum.to_list()
```

## A stream of answers

Just like in algebra, a query in `Logos` can have more than one answer--possibly an _infinite_ number. This is why `ask` returns a stream. An open-ended question shows the need for a stream: _What are the lists for which the value `:item` is a member?_ The builtin `Logos` rule `member(item, list)` can be used to ask this question:

```elixir
ask [l] do
  member(:item, l)
end
|> Enum.take(20)
```

Intuitively, it's apparent that there is an infinite collection of lists that satisfy this query--lists of all possible lengths where `:item` is in any available position. The result above shows 10 such lists from the infinite stream. Other values in the lists of the form `:_<integer>` are variable slots that are not constrained by the query and can hold any value.

## Blending rules

More interesting programs can be built by combining simple rules. The two mechanisms used to combine rules are _disjunction_ ("or" logic) and _conjunction_ ("and" logic). In `Logos`, the two corresponding rules are `any` and `all`, both of which take a list of zero or more goals as arguments.

This question illustrates the use of conjunctive logic: _If `x` equals `y` and `y` equals 1, what is the value of `x`?_ The following query asks this question in `Logos` and introduces `with_vars`, a macro that injects new variables into a goal:

```elixir
ask [x] do
  with_vars [y] do
    all([
      equal(x, y),
      equal(y, 1)
    ])
  end
end
|> Enum.to_list()
```

`Logos` allows implicit conjunctions in `ask`, where a list of goals `[g1, g2, ...]` is interpreted as `all([g1, g2, ...])`, so that the above query can be simplified to

```elixir
ask [x] do
  with_vars [y] do
    [
      equal(x, y),
      equal(y, 1)
    ]
  end
end
|> Enum.to_list()
```

Another simple question and corresponding `Logos` query demonstrate the use of `any`: _If `x` can equal "a" or "b" or "c", what are the values of `x`?_

```elixir
ask [x] do
  any([
    equal(x, "a"),
    equal(x, "b"),
    equal(x, "c")
  ])
end
|> Enum.to_list()
```

As expected, the result has 3 possible solution states. Notice that `any([...])` in the above query could be replaced with `member(x, ["a", "b", "c"])`.

<!-- livebook:{"break_markdown":true} -->

The primitive rules `any` and `all` can be combined to exhibit more interesting behaviors:

```elixir
ask [x, y] do
  any([
    all([equal(x, "a"), equal(y, 1)]),
    all([equal(x, "b"), equal(y, 2)]),
    all([equal(x, "c"), equal(y, 3)])
  ])
end
|> Enum.to_list()
```

Queries like this--a dijunction of conjunctions--are common in logic programming. `Logos` offers the macro `fork` to reduce the syntactic load of these expressions:

```elixir
ask [x, y] do
  fork do
    [equal(x, "a"), equal(y, 1)]
    [equal(x, "b"), equal(y, 2)]
    [equal(x, "c"), equal(y, 3)]
  end
end
|> Enum.to_list()
```

`Logos` goes one step further by making the `fork` syntax available in both `ask` and `with_vars`. The above query can be written more simply as

<!-- livebook:{"force_markdown":true} -->

```elixir
ask [x, y] do
    [equal(x, "a"), equal(y, 1)]
    [equal(x, "b"), equal(y, 2)]
    [equal(x, "c"), equal(y, 3)]
end
```

## What's next?

_Coming soon._
